Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com.
. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes today. I'm
talking with Paige Bailey. She
is a data scientist machine
learning and AI expert, and
you've done a bunch of
cool stuff. You've worked in
the, in the geo. What
is it called? Geosciences and
like oil. And you worked
at Chevron and you did
work with NASA and physics
and the space. Absolutely. So
I'm my background is geophysics
and carbonate geology, and that
meant that I got to
do a lot of interesting
stuff with subsurface geoscience, and
then also for planetary science,
which is learning how I'm
learning, how our, our earth
can tell us a little
bit about other planets. So,
yeah, it was a lot
of fun. So you were
using machine learning and data
science and things like that
to ask questions that you
did not know the answer
to. Absolutely. So the most
of the work that I
did at Chevron was around
drilling optimization and completions optimization.
So drilling optimization is like,
how fast can you drill
the well and completions optimization
is how well can you
get the oil out of
the ground once you've drilled
it? So how, how effectively
can you hold open the,
the wellbore itself and facilitate
the movement of hydrocarbons, which
is just gas and oil
back up to the surface.
Wow. The reason that I
bring that up and why
that's interesting is because we're
going to talk about machine
learning kind of one Oh
one here, but what I
like about your background is
it's extremely practical. There's a
lot of people who talk
about machine learning in a
very theoretical context and data
science and all those things,
but to understand it and
use it in a real
practical and physical way, I
think is really interesting, Right?
Like there, there's so many
kind of toy problems available
online with very structured data.
And, you know, it's, it's
always very simple to see
kind of a machine learning
problem, subset, and to 300
records and like maybe four
or five variables and all
of the data's nice and
friendly and you get a
very clear result, but in
the real world, it's hardly
ever like that. Right? The
real world is quite dirty.
One of the things that
I have a little bit
of trouble with is that
I tend to clump together,
all these different technologies. I
did it. I did it
even in your intro data
science, that's a thing, machine
learning. That's a thing, AI,
that's a thing. But for
someone like me that doesn't
know what any of those
things mean. I just kind
of clump them together into
the general family of like
data science and machine learning.
Maybe you could tease those
apart for us. Oh, well,
so I'm glad that you
said that. Cause everybody seems
to have an opinion about
what data science is and
there, none of them are
the same. So, so it's,
so you were in, you
were in very good company,
but data science is actually
kind of a conflation of
something called data engineering, which
is, you know, sort of
typical tasks that a database
engineer would do. So building
data pipelines, getting everything into
a consistent format, doing a
lot of data cleaning. So
making sure that everything is
in this, all of your
data types are similar. You
know, they're all spelled correctly,
they're all in consistent formats.
Then there's also the additional
component of the statistical analysis.
So looking at data and
making sure that if you
have a certain population, those
populations are evenly represented throughout
the data. And then machine
learning is, is more of
the predictive modeling aspect. So
if you're doing machine learning,
you're usually building a model.
Hopefully you have enough understanding
of statistics to know that
the data that you're inputting
into the model is a
representative sample of a whole.
And then deep learning is
just doing predictive modeling on
a whole bunch of data.
So a higher dimensional space
and usually leveraging a GPU
or something like a spark
cluster. Yep. So, so that's,
that's kind of, does that
make a little bit more
sense? So data science is
a conflation of data engineering,
statistical analysis and machine learning
machine learning is, is something
that you do if you
want to do predictive modeling
and deep learning is, is
just doing predictive modeling on
a whole heck of a
lot of data and usually
usually higher dimensional spaces and
usually leveraging something like a
GPU. Okay. So how much
data do I need before
I get to call myself
a data scientist? Like I
spent a lot of time
in tens of thousands of
records in Excel, 20, 30
years ago. I was so
I must have been doing
data cleaning and formatting and
structuring. And that, that sucked
Well. Yes, it, it does
suck all the time, but,
but I mean, there's, there's
no, there's no fun aspect
of data cleaning like 90%
of your job as a
data scientist is getting data
into a nicely wrangled format.
But the, I would say
if you, if you look
at the, the examples of
machine learning online, a lot
of models are built using
like 500 records. So very,
very little like 500 lines
in an Excel spreadsheet with
like six or seven columns.
And that could build a
predictive model. You know? So
it's not about size, like
when I say data science
or we say machine learning,
I don't need to have
terabytes of stuff. Like that's
a good myth for us
to bust. Absolutely. You don't
need terabytes of data at
all. And if you want
to do deep learning. So
I think there was an
example, there was an example
with something called cognitive services
recently, where you can train
a model to recognize a
face using just five or
six photos of that person's
space. So it's, it's, as
long as you have kind
of like a base that
the computer can understand. So
like they, they know where
the eyes are. They know
where the eyebrows are, they
know where the noses, the
mouth and those sorts of
things. They can kind of
suss out the characteristics of
a person's face very quickly.
And it's also, it's also
kind of like where, when
your surface book or your
iPhone or something recognizes your
face and uses that to
unlock it. That's using, that's
using a deep learning model,
but it's certainly not, you
know, terabytes and terabytes of
data about your face. It's
just taking a couple of
pictures of it. Okay. Now
we've talked about and conflated
two different kinds of data.
Like I can think about
like Excel or, you know,
it, would it be two
dimensional data like rows and
columns and then, or rows
and many columns. And then
you mentioned pictures, which is
that like my system brings
in JPEGs and bitmaps, or
is that my system thinks
about matrices with RGB values.
So it's usually, so it
could be either one, but
usually it's the, the latter,
the RGB values. So if
you're, if you pull in
a picture into a deep
learning model, the first step
is, is usually that it
turns it into three different
components, right? So you have
your, your red values, your
green values and your blue
values, except they're, they're in
a different color spectrum. And,
and then the, the model
kind of runs on those
pixels and starts to pick
out which components would indicate
a cap or which components
would indicate a dog. And
the thing about deep learning.
So machine learning, you have
things like random forests and
decision trees and, you know,
linear aggression and all of
those little wonderful things that
you've probably heard about. And
for deep learning, there, there
are a lot of different,
there are a lot of
different algorithms there as well,
but they're, but they're less
easy to, to kind of
audit, right? So if you
build out a, if you
build out a, a decision
tree, it gives you a
series of yes or no
questions. So the example I
always like to use is
if you have a decision
tree model that determines whether
or not a person gets
alone, it'll probably look at
things like how much money's
in their bank accounts and
whether or not they're employed
and whether or not they've
defaulted on a loan before.
And using that information, it'll
say like, Oh, well, you
know, their bank account is
currently overdrawn and they've defaulted
on a loan before, and
they're not employed, so let's
not give them a loan
again, you know? And, and
that's, that would be each
one of those questions would
be a branch in your
machine learning decision tree. Okay.
So deep learning is more
structured and it's part of
that family of machine learning
things. Yes. Okay. And it's,
and it's harder to audit.
So like I said, the
decision tree, you would be
able to point back at
those questions and say like,
Oh, well, you know, we
answered no and no, and
no. And so we didn't
give them a loan. And
that way, if somebody tried
to Sue you, you would
have an answer. Whereas deep
learning, you give the computer
the data and you say,
computer, give me an answer.
And the computer gives you
an answer and it's right.
Like 99% of the time,
but you have no clue
what it's up to. Okay.
That's good. That, that, that,
there's lots of different angles
to come at the, what's
the difference between deep learning
and machine learning question. But
that one is like, I
put in an input, a
function ran, but the function
is a black box and
a miracle, and the answer
came out and it was
an amazing answer. But I
can't tell you why. I
just know that it was
right. Absolutely. And that's why
a lot. And that's why
a lot of companies really,
really feel, you know, a
bunch of misgivings about using
deep learning algorithms. Because if
you have something that's like
very high stakes, so you're
investing billions of dollars. You
kind of want to know
like, okay, well, give me,
give me some rationale as
to why I should invest
billions of dollars. It's, it's
not very, you get a
lot of misgivings if the
computer's giving you an answer
because you know, for all,
you know, it could be
wrong, even though it, even
though when you test it,
it's mostly right. I've heard,
I've heard people refer to
like the, the, the family
of artificial intelligence in a
number of different ways, machine
learning, deep learning. And then
this idea of good old
fashioned AI, like they'll sometimes
write it as a, as
an acronym geo FAI to
like the kind of the
more classic, straightforward, understandable things.
And then like all the
different things you listed off
linear regression and dishes and
razors are all different sub
sub flavors, right? So there's
like the family of, of
creamy desserts and then there's
ice cream and there's gelato
and there's all the different
things. And sometimes you just
want to get back to
the basics. And you're saying
that people are concerned about
deep learning because it's this
leap that, that jumps over
good old fashioned AI and
things that we understand into
this much more complicated world.
Absolutely. It's, it's going to
revolutionize the way people write
programs. So it, it's no
longer the, the typical, the
typical programming where, you know,
you have if and else
statements and, and it's very
structured, like little Lego bricks
building out a thing it's
suddenly, you know, the computer
is the computers creating software
of its own. And you
know, the human is, has
less of a hands on,
less controlling sort of role.
Hey everyone, this is Scott.
I want to take a
minute and talk to you
about smarty streets. You've probably
already heard about them. They
provide API APIs for address
validation and geocoding that cover
most, every address on the
planet. Their fans described their
services as having dead simple
API APIs that are blazing
fast with fantastic documentation. And
they provide unlimited tech support
and 100% uptime. You know,
I actually met these folks
personally a few years ago
at an event in Las
Vegas. Not only are they
extremely knowledgeable, they're a lot
of fun as well. They're
definitely worth your time to
check out. So go check
out smarty streets.com/hansel minutes today,
and try out their full
API demos for free. So
let's pop a little bit
off the stack here because
we got really deep, really
fast, and I wanted to
talk machine learning one-on-one and
I'm, I am not a
data scientist. I don't even
play one on TV, but
you are. So let's say
you and I are on
a team or the listeners
who are also not data
scientists or are on the
team with you. And they're
hearing things about doing machine
learning and consuming it, and
they hear about Python and
they hear about AR and
then they wonder if they
need to learn one of
those things, if they want
to interact with you as
a data scientist. So the
answer is no, and which
is, which is a great
sort of thing. Most machine
learning algorithms and most deep
learning algorithms are implemented in
Python and R. But if
you're a developer who's tasked
with building an application that
just takes the input or
the output of a model,
or sends an input to
a model, really all you
need to know is how
to interact with the rest
API. So what you should
all be telling your data
scientists is if they, if
the output of their model
is like a CSV file
with a whole bunch of
values and they, they can't
give it back to you
in a structured Jaison format,
or that that is not
acceptable, you know, that they
need to, that they need
to be giving you something
that you could incorporate into
your application. Okay. So I
can think about this entire
universe, this entire world of
artificial intelligence and machine learning
as functions and puts outputs.
And I can hopefully consume
them in a way that
will make me feel smart,
but will be really easy
to do. Absolutely. And, and
it's a personal opinion that
the data scientist should be
the person who is responsible
for, for checking to make
sure that the model continues
to operate as it should.
So, so over time you
might end up with something
called data drift or model
drift, which is that when
the data scientists creates their
model, so create some model
that predicts the number of
widgets that are going to
be sold in July or
predicts the price of oranges
in July. They might get
some additional information, you know,
after their model's been created,
that would, that would change
the model's behavior. So say,
so say if I'm predicting
the price of oranges in
July of next year, and
then suddenly, you know, in
January, there is a huge
disease for every orange orchard
in the world, you know,
that would probably cause the
price of oranges disco rocket.
So if you had, if
you were using the model
that had been built today,
though, you, you wouldn't have
that information included. So as
your, as your model is
deployed, you need to keep
refreshing it with new data.
So kind of the DevOps
component of data science, and
you need to make sure
that your, your accuracy stays
to the level that it's
supposed to be. Okay. So
that's interesting. So let me
see if I can paraphrase
and understand what you just
said. So we could do
something around recognizing faces, but
faces change. Although they fail,
they change over centuries rather
than over months. If I'm
doing something over a period
of years or seasons, like
you described something that's more
temporal, I could use the
last hundred years, but then
in a year or two
or five, that's going to
become old. So then I'm
going to need to, and
I think you had told
me before, the word is
operationalize the model, you're going
to, you design a model
and then you deploy it,
put it out into the
world, wrap it up in
a convenient web service. So
it sounds like you're telling
me that I need a
dev ops plan for my
machine learning department and my
models so that I can
take those functions and deploy
them the same way that
I deploy any code. Absolutely.
And you also need to
be tracking the accuracy of
your models over time in
order to understand what that
cadence should be like for
how often you refresh your
data, because it's all based
on business rules, right? Like,
it's, it might be like
you said, refresh it once
a year or it might
be refresh it every night
or every week or every
month. Okay. So then how
do I decide? I decide
based on the kind of
stuff that we're predicting, it
could be predicting the price
of Bitcoin, or it could
be predicting how a continence
shift, which are going to
be different levels of operationalization.
Absolutely. Okay. All right. And
this is in R or
it's in Python or whatever
I'm done to deploy it
to a server. I've done
some, I did some very
minor machine learning stuff. And
the model that was generated
seemed small, like from the
perspective of as a file
on disc, it was a
small thing that freaked me
out because we had pulled
from a couple of terabytes
of data and then a
couple of megabytes popped out.
How is that possible? So
think of your model, just
like you would think about
an equation, right? So they're,
so the, the gentleman who
made physics, like the very,
very bright folks who did
all the experiments and discovered
that, you know, Oh, acceleration
due to gravity is 9.8.
You know, they probably ran
a ton of experiments where
they were dropping all sorts
of things from all sorts
of Heights and writing down
numbers over extended periods of
time before they came up
with that, Oh, well, it's,
you know, it's 9.8 meters
per second squared for acceleration
due to gravity. But we
don't really care about all
the data that it took
to generate that number. All
we care about is that
if you drop something from
a height, now we have
the equation that can tell
us how fast it's gonna
fall and when it's going
to hit the ground. So
your model is just basically
that equation, right? Like the
ton of data was used
to generate what that equation
should be, but now you've
got the equation and you
can just apply it to
whatever inputs and outputs you
have. Okay. But it's not,
it's not an equation that
I can see. It's just
binary bits in this model.
It's just, it's, it's, it's,
it's not an equation I
could express and draw. Yep.
It's it won't be in
it unless it's something like
linear regression algorithm, which would
give you kind of like
a Y equals MX plus
peak on the thing. Okay.
But whatever your model is,
is doing it, it's basically
just an equation or, or
a recipe on what output
you should be getting. If
you, if you input a
certain thing, How do I
debug it then if I
can't look at it. So
debugging is, is really interesting
when it comes to machine
learning into deep learning. So
machine learning it's a little
bit more straight forward. So
you can, you can tweak
these things called hyper parameters,
which are just kind of
inputs to a function. So
an example would be there's
this thing called a Martin
Gale, which is a wonderful
name. If I ever get
a pet bird, I'm going
to name it, Martin Gale,
but I'm a Martin Gale.
Just think of it as
kind of like a window
for running average. So you
could take the last five
values to get your average,
or you could take the
last 10 values to get
your average or the last
two values to get your
average. And the number of
values you select is, is
called a Martin Gale. Right?
And that's one of, that's
an example of a hyper
parameter that you could tune
for a model is how
many values you use to
generate an average. So, yeah,
so each one, each machine
learning model has a variety
of those kinds of hyper
parameters that you can just
keep shifting around until you
find one that gives you
the highest accuracy or, or
whatever value you care about.
And then once you, once
you've tweaked those hyper-parameters appropriately,
that's, that's kind of how
you debugged your model, or
it could be that. So
you have, you have this
data set, right? So say
you have a dataset that
predicts how long a person's
gonna live. And you have
things like you have things
like how many, you know,
what their weight is, what
their blood pressure is, how
many calories they per day.
And then you might have
a whole bunch of fields
that are like plays, soccer
goes, jogging, goes hiking. And,
and those would all be
yes or no values. It
could be that you could
consolidate all of those sort
of physical activity columns into
one column that's just like
is active. And that's some,
so that consolidation process is
called feature engineering. So, so
being able to look at
a data set and say
like, Oh, well, I think
all of these are kind
of telling me the same
thing. So let's just put
them into one column as
opposed to six columns, and
that could improve the accuracy
of your model. Hm. Yeah.
That, that word Martin Gale,
my sister in law has
horses. And the Martin Gale
is part of the reins
of the horse that keeps
it from going too high.
I wonder if that relates
somehow to using it in
the context of data and
making sure that the data
doesn't go quote unquote too
high. Awesome. That it could
be. Yup. Yeah. Yeah. I
like, I that's another whole
like podcast we could do
on etymology of words. Cause
Marty, Gale has goes back
hundreds and hundreds of years.
So then if the model,
the, the what's the different
overfitting and under fitting, cause
you described a model that
worked really well. But if
the model that works too
well, that can be a
problem as well. Yes. So
deep learning. That's another reason
why I don't like it
as much as I should
probably, but so deep learning
it's, it's incredibly effective, you
know, like it is, it
is ridiculous, really effective. And
it's it's, I think it's,
it's going to be the
way that most, that most
machine learning goes in the
future, but there's, there's an
issue with deep learning where,
so say you have, you
have a picture of a
Panda. It's very obviously a
Panda and your deep learning
model looks at it and
is like, good job page.
I'm 72% sure. That's a
Panda. If you add one
red pixel and a very
specific location on that picture
dependent on the picture. So
you just add one red
pixel or you introduce like
0.07% noise into that picture.
So it still looks the
same to the human. Other
than that one red dot
or it still the same
to the human, other than
like maybe a little bit
more greenish then that your
deep learning model could look
at it and say, you
know what, page 99% sure
that's a camel. Yeah. And
it, and it still looks
almost exactly the same to
the human, right? Like it's
still very, obviously a Panda,
just a Panda with one
red pixel dot, but your
deep learning model is completely
confused or you probably saw
on hacker news recently, there
was like a turtle that
TensorFlow thought was a gun.
And no matter which direction
it looked at it TensorFlow
was just dang. Sure that
that was a gun. Yeah.
That's concerning. If the thing's
job is to recognize, you
know, guns, like if I
brought my turtle to the
airport and the machine learning
algorithm decided that was a
bad guy. Right. And the
thing I worry about too,
right. Is if you have
a company that's tasked with
determining missile locations from satellite
imagery and they have, you
know, a bunch of satellite
images that have been classified
as like, Oh, that's a
location with missiles. Oh no,
that's not a location with
missiles at all. If you
have, you know, some, some
bad actor who introduces again,
just 0.07% random noise to
a Corpus of images, they
would still look exactly the
same to the company. That's
analyzing the satellite imagery, but
suddenly none of them would
be correctly classified. So you
would have like an area
maybe with civilians that was
classified as probably MSL location
or a place that missile
a location that was classified
as innocuous. Okay. So pushing,
pushing back a little bit
on that or pushing on
that, because that is totally
freaking me out. How does
that kind of stuff, not
completely invalidate machine learning and
AI and how could I
ever trust it again? So
lucky for us, there are
a bunch of really smart
people working on these problems.
If you have, if you
have interest in the subject
it's called adversarial machine learning.
So being able to yep.
So, so being able to
spot, being able to spot
some of those issues with
your algorithms before, before they
become issues, there's a project
run out of Google brain
called clever hands. That, that
is specifically focused on how
to detect, how to detect
those like one pixel problems
and how to, how to
prevent against them and what
they're, what they're actually doing
for some of the research
is using deep learning to,
to test other deep learning
algorithms. So like you're using
deep learning algorithms against each
other to make each other
better over and over and
over again, which is fascinating.
And you're saying that's, it
reminds me of like making
a copy of a copy
of a mix tape, except
it usually gets worse. Yep.
But it's, but for, you
know, for whatever reason, it
just, it just keeps getting
better. It's like the, I
believe alpha go. That was
one of the, that was
one of the methods of
training. It was that, you
know, you, you just keep
using smarter and smarter algorithms
against each other and Go
is the go algorithm that
beat a human, The go
algorithm that beat a human
and that they kind of
trained itself very, very quickly
to, to be go there's
there's also recently, I'm not
sure if it was AlphaGo
or if it was something
else, it learned how to
play chess by itself just
by looking at a number
of games. And it learned
very, very quickly. So like,
Yeah, so you do this
all day. This is your
job full time. You're thinking
about this stuff. I am
just a lowly programmer. When
I see things on the
news where it says, you
know, Elon Musk says that
that AI is going to
kill us all that is
concerning to me. How do
data scientists in the community
feel about statements like that?
Like is Skynet going to
be a machine learning model?
I heard that Skynet was
going to be JavaScript or
it was going to be
written in JavaScript. But so,
so it's so funny too,
because Elon Musk, you know,
is, is very, is very
emphatically against AI, but he's
also including it in every
single one of his products.
So like the self driving,
the self driving components of
Teslas, that is definitely AI.
But I honestly, I think
that the way that AI
is going to be potentially
detrimental to society is if
we don't take care to
make sure that our algorithms
are implemented in an ethical
way. And I, I understand
that you had a recent,
recent Hanselman it's about ethical
algorithms as well. So, but
I honestly think that it's,
it's not going to be,
you know, AI create Skynet.
I think it's going to
be that there, that there
are going to be more
and more decisions being made
by algorithms that impact already
marginalized groups and then very
negative way. And that's, that's
something that hurts my heart.
Why would you think that
Elon being presumably a smart
person would say something like
that? So in fact they
already think that's just the
media over selling it. I
think it's probably the media
overselling it. And then it's
also, you know, a great
way to ensure that other
people aren't really practicing as
much as they, as they
could be. Right. Like, like
maybe it's a business tactic.
So, but you know, and,
and it's also those, those
kinds of broad statements, nobody
can really predict the future
other than maybe Neil Stevenson.
Like he seems to be
pretty dang good at it,
but the deal with AI
creating something like how or
something like, you know, the,
the crazy things that you
see in science fiction novels.
I don't, like I said,
I, I don't think that
that's, that's going to be
the thing that potentially harms
humanity. I think it's going
to be a little bit
more nuanced. Well, certainly it's
a tool, right? And it's
feasible that someone could use
that tool or JavaScript to,
to hurt humanity. But I
guess the idea is you
don't think that it's going
to happen on its own.
Like if a bad actor
or a bad guy or
gal decides to do something
evil like that, that's one
thing. But for them to,
for, for the, the thing,
the AlphaGo to do it
on its own, you find
online. Absolutely. That is a
perfect way. That's a perfect
way to describe it. All
right. Well that will, I
will sleep better. I will
probably never play go well
again, but I will, I
will feel much better. Thanks
so much for chatting with
me today. It was a
ton of fun. I love
talking about machine learning. This
doesn't feel like a job.
Like Can people find you
online and learn more about
what you're doing and learn
more about machine learning? Oh,
a ton of places. But
my Twitter handle is probably
the best way to find
me. It is dynamic webpage
with Paige spelled like my
name and that's. And I'm
also dynamic with page pretty
much everywhere on the internet.
If you want to learn
more about AI, I sincerely
recommend either the AI school
from Microsoft or deep learning
or machine learning from Andrew
NG, both of those courses
are available on Coursera and
they're both phenomenal. And there's
also a website called data
camp. So data, camp.com that
teaches you everything that you
would ever want to learn
about machine learning with Python
or R. So data cleaning,
data processing, building out machine
learning models, doing deep learning.
All of that is, is
available for like $29 a
month on data camp. And
it's for free if you're
a student. So Rock on.
Awesome tips. Thanks so much.
This has been another episode
of Hansel minutes and we'll
see you again next week.